Introduction to Mushroom

CHAPTER I INTRODUCTION TO MUSHROOM CULTURE

Figure 0

of

ostreatus

6/The Mushroom Cultivator The cap is supported by a That the gills above ground where the spores can be carried off by the slightest wind currents. every part of the mushroom is designed to give the spores the best opportunity to mature and spread in an external environment that is harsh and drastically As the mushroom matures, spore production slows and eventually stops. At this time mushrooms are in their last hours of life. Soon decay from bacteria and other fungi sets in, reducing the once majestic mushroom into a soggy mass of fetid tissue that melts into the ground from which it sprung.

THE MUSHROOM LIFE CYCLE
Cultivating mushrooms is one of The best ways to observe the entirety of the Mushroom Life Cycle. The life cycle first starts with a spore which produces a mycelium. When the mycelium originating from two spores mates, a secondary mycelium is produced. This continues to grow When vegetative mycelium has matured, its cells are capable of a phenomenal rate of reproduction which culminates in The erection of mushroom fruitbody. This represents the last functional change and it has become, in effect, mycelium. These of represent The Three major phases in The progression of mushroom life cycle. Most mushrooms produce spores that are uninucleate and genetically haploid This means each spore one nucleus and has half the complement of chromosomes for the species. Thus spores have a "sex" in that each has to mate with from another spore to be for producing offspring. When spores are first released they are fully inflated "moist" that can easily germinate. Soon they dehydrate, collapsing at their and in this phase they can sit Through long periods of dry weaTher or severe drought. When weather conditions pro-

Figure 3 of

Scanning electron micrograph spores.

Figure 4 of

Scanning electron micrograph spores.

Introduction to Mushroom Culture/7 vide a sufficiently moist the spores rehydrate and fully inflate. Only then is germination possible. Spores within an individual species are fairly in their shape and structure. However, many mushroom species differ remarkably in their spore types. Some are smooth and lemon shaped (in genus for instance); many are ellipsoid (as in the genus while others are highly ornamented and irregularly shaped (such as (hose in or A feature common to the spores of many mushrooms, particularly the species, is the formation of an apical germ pore. The germ pore, a circular depression at one end of the spore, is the site of germination from which a haploid strand of mycelium a emanates. This to grow, branches and becomes a mycelial network. When two sexually complementary hyphal networks intercept one another and make walls separating the two hyphal systems dissolve and cytoplasmic and materials are exchanged. Erotic or not, this is "mushroom sex". Henceall resulting mycelium is binucleate and dikaryotic. This means each cell has two nuclei and a full complement of chromosomes. With few exceptions, only mated (dikaryotic) mycelia is fertile and capable of producing fruitbodies. Typically, dikaryotic mycelia is faster running and more

Figure 5

High resolution scanning electron micrograph showing germ pores of spores.

8/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure 6

Scanning electron micrograph of a

spore germinating.

vigorous than unmated, mycelia. Once a mycelium has entered into the can occur shortly thereafter. In cubensis, the time between spore germination and initials can be as brief as two weeks; in some species only a week transpires before mushrooms appear. Most mushroom species, take several weeks or months before mushrooms can be generated from the time of spore germination. Cultivators interested in developing new strains by crossing single spore isolates take advantage of the occurrence of clamp connections to tell whether or not mating has taken place. Clamp connections are microscopic bridges that protrude from one adjoining cell to and are only found in dikaryotic mycelia. Clamps can be readily seen with a light microscope at 100-400X magnification. Not all species form clamp connections. does not; most all Psilocybe and Panaeolus species do). In mycelia resulting from haploid spores lack clamps. This feature is an tool for the researcher developing new strains. (For more information on breeding strategies, see Chapter XV.) Two dikaryotic networks can also grow together, exchange genetic material and form a new strain. Such an encounter, where two hyphal fuse, is known as anastomosis. When two incompatible colonies of mycelia meet, a zone of inhibited growth frequently forms. On agar media, this zone of is visible to the unaided eye.

Introduction To Mushroom Culture/9

Figure 7 ing

Scanning electron micrograph of hyphae emanating from a bed of germinatcubensis spores.

When a mycelium produces mushrooms, several radical changes in its metabolism occurs. Up to this point, the mycelium has been growing vegetatively. In the vegetative hyphal cells are amassing nutrients. Curiously, there is a gradual increase in the number of nuclei per cell, sometimes to as many as ten just prior to the formation of mushrooms. before fruitbodies form, new cell walls divide the nuclei, reducing Their number per cell to an average of The high number of nuclei per cell in mycelia seems to be a prerequisite for fruiting in many mushroom species. As the gills mature, basidia cells emerge in ever increasing numbers, first appearing as small cells and resembling cobblestones on a street. The basidia are the focal point in the reproductive phase of the mushroom life cycle. The basidia, however, do all at once. In genus for the basidia cells mature regionally, giving the gill surface a spotted look. The cells giving rise to the basidia are Typically binucleate, each nucleus is haploid and the cell is said to be dikaryotic. The of the young cells are similar. At a specific point in time, the Two nuclei in The basidium migrate towards one another and merge into a single nucleus. This is known as karyogamy. Soon thereafter, the diploid nuundergoes meiosis and typically produces four haploid daughter cells.

Mushroom Cultivator

Figure 8, 9, & cubensis. Note

Scanning electron micrographs of the mycelial network of crossings and clamp connections.

Introduction to Mushroom On surface of the basidia, arm-like projections called sterigmatae arise which these nuclei then migrate. most species four spores form at the tips of these projections. The spores continue to they are forcefully liberated from the basidia and into free space. The mechanism for spore release has not yet been proven. But, the model most widely accepted within the mycological community is one where a "gas bubble" forms at the junction of the spore and the sterigmata. This gas inflates, and the spore into the the gills where it is away by air currents. Most commonly, sets of opposing spores are released in this manner. With spore release, the life cycle is completed. Not all mushroom species have basidia that produce four haploid spores. Agaricus (= the common button mushroom, has basidia with two diploid (2N) spores. This means each spore can evolve into a mycelium that is fully capable of producing mushrooms. Agaricus brunnescens is one example of a diploid bipolar species. Some Copelandian Panaeoli (the strongly bluing species in the genus Panaeolus) are two spored and have mating properties similar to Agaricus brunnescens. Other mushrooom species have spored basidia; some have five spored basidia; and a like the common Chantarelle, have as many as eight spores per basidium! An awareness of the life cycle will greatly aid beginning cultivators in their initial attempts to cultivate mushrooms. Once a basic understanding of mushroom culture and the life processes of these organisms is achieved, cultivators can progress to more advanced like genetics, strain selection and breeding. This wholistic approach increases the depth of one's understanding and facilitates development of innovative approaches to mushroom cultivation.

12 & 13 Scanning electron micrographs showing the development ot the and spores in Ramaria longispora, a coral fungus.

Mushroom Cultivator

Figure

Scanning electron micrograph of mature basidium in Panaeofus foenisecii.

Figure 15a, 15b Scanning electron micrographs showing basidium of Note spore/sterigmata junction.

Introduction

Mushroom

Figure 16 Scanning electron micrograph of two spored basidium of an as yet lished species closely related to Note nuclei visible within each spore.

17 Scanning electron micrograph of the gill surface of Cantharellus cibarius. six and eight spored basidia.

Sterile Technique and Agar

CHAPTER II STERILE TECHNIQUE AND AGAR CULTURE

Figure 18

A home cultivator's pantry converted into a sterile laboratory.

18/The Mushroom Cultivator and is sometimes equipped with rubber gloves into which The cultivator inserts his hands. Often, in place of gloves, the front face is covered with a removable cotton cloth that is periodically sterilized. The main advantage of a glove box is that it provides an inexpensive, easily cleaned area where culture work can Take place with little or no air movement. 3. Modern laboratories solve the problem of airborne contamination by installing High Efficiency Particulate Air (HEPA) filters. These filters screen out all particulates exceeding 0.1 -0.3 microns in diameter, smaller than the spores of all fungi and practically all bacteria. HEPA filters are built into what is commonly known as a laminar flow hood. Some sterile laboratories have an entire wall or ceiling constructed of HEPA filters through which pressurized air is forced from the outside. In effect, a positive pressure, sterile environment is created. Specific data regarding the building and design of laminar flow systems is discussed in greater detail in Appendix IV. Some cultivators have few problems with contaminants while working in what seems like the most primitive conditions. Others encounter pronounced contamination levels and have to invest in high technology controls. Each circumstance dictates an appropriate counter-measure. Whether one is a home cultivator or a spawn maker in a commercial laboratory, the problems encountered are similar, differing not in kind, but in degree.

Figure 19 Aero-disinfector for reducing contaminant spore load in laboratory.

Figure 20

Laminar flow hood,

22/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure 22 & 23 Pouring agar media into sterile petri dishes. At left, vertical stack technique. manufacturer's recommendations. And some extra time must be allowed for adequate penetration of steam, especially in densely packed, large autoclaves. Once sterilized, place the cooker in the laboratory or in a semisterile room and allow the pressure to return to 1 psi before opening. One liter of agar media can generously fill thirty 100 x 15 mm. petri dishes. Techniques for pouring vary with the cultivator. If only one or two sleeves of petri dishes are being prepared, the plates should be laid out side by side on the working surface. If more Than two sleeves are being poured or table space is limited, pouring the sterile petri dishes in a vertical stack is usually more convenient. Before pouring, vigorously shake the molten media to evenly distribute its ingredients. Experienced cultivators fill the plates rhythmically and without interruption. Allow the agar media to cool and solidify before using. Condensation often forms on The inside surface of The upper lid of a petri dish when the agar media being poured is still at a high temperature. To reduce condensation, one can wait a period of time before pouring. If the pressure cooker sits for 45 minutes after reaching 1 psi, a liter of liquid media can be poured with little discomfort To unprotected hands. Two types of culTures can be obTained from a selected mushroom: one from its spores and The oTher from living tissue of a mushroom. Either Type can produce a viable strain of mycelia. Each has advantages and disadvantages.

Sterile Technique and Agar Culture/23

STARTING A CULTURE FROM SPORES
A mushroom culture can be started in one of two ways. Most growers start a culture from spores. The advantage of using spores is that they are viable for weeks to months after the mushroom has decomposed. The other way of obtaining a culture is to cut a piece of interior tissue from a live specimen, in effect a clone. Tissue cultures must be taken within a day or two from the time the mushroom has been picked, after which a healthy clone becomes increasingly difficult to establish.

Taking a Spore Print
To collect spores, sever the cap from the stem of a fresh, well cleaned mushroom and place it gills down on a piece of clean white paper or a clean glass surface such as a microscope slide. If a specimen is partially dried, add a drop or two of water to the cap surface to aid in the release of spores. To lessen evaporation and disturbance from air currents, place a cup or glass over the mushroom cap. After a few hours, the spores will have fallen according to the radiating symmetry of the gills. If the spore print has been taken on paper, cut it out, fold it in half, seal in an airtight container and label the print with the date, species and collection number. When using microscope slides, the spores can be sandwiched between two pieces of glass and taped along the edges to prevent the entry of contaminant spores. A spore print carelessly taken or stored can easily become contaminated, decreasing the chance of acquiring a pure culture.

Figure24a Taking a spore print on typing paper.

24/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure 24b Taking a spore print on a sterile petri dish and on glass microscope slides. Figure 25 Sterilizing two scalpels speeds up agar transfer technique. Agaricus brunnescens, Psilocybe cubensis and many other mushroom species have a partial veil—a Thin layer of tissue extending from the cap margin To the stem. This veil can be an aid in The procurement of nearly contaminant-free spores. The veil seals the gill from the outside, creating a semi-sterile chamber from which spores can be removed with little danger of contamination. By choosing a healthy, young specimen with the veil intact, and then by carefully removing the veil tissue under aseptic conditions, a nearly pure spore print is obtained. This is the ideal way to start a multispore culture.

Techniques for Spore Germination
Once a spore print is obtained, mushroom culture can begin. Sterilize an inoculating loop or scalpel by holding it over the flame of an alcohol lamp or butane torch for five or ten seconds until it is red hot. (If a butane torch is used, turn it down to the lowest possible setting to minimize air disturbance). Cool the tip by inserting it into the sterile media in a petri dish and scrape some spores off the print. Transfer the spores by streaking the Tip of the transfer tool across the agar surface, A similar method calls for scraping the spore print above an opened petri dish and allowing them to freefall onto the medium. When starting a new culture from spores, it is best to inoculate at least three media dishes to improve the chances of getting a successful germination. Mycelium started in this manner is called a multispore culture. When first produced, spores are rnoist, inflated cells with a relatively high rate of germination. As time passes, they dry, collapse at their centers and can not easily germinate. The probability of germinating dehydrated spores increases by soaking them in sterilized water. For 30 minutes at 15 psi, sterilize an eye dropper or similar device (syringe or pipette) and a water filled test tube or

26/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure 26

Stropharia rugoso-annulata spores germinating.

Figure 27 Psilocybe cubensis mycelium growing from agar wedge, transferred from a multispore germination. Note two types of mycelial growth.

Sterile Technique and Agar Culture/27 Cultures from wild specimens may fruit very poorly in an artificial environment. Just as with wild plants, strains of wild mushrooms must be selectively developed. Of the many newly created strains intrinsic to multispore germination, some may be only capable of vegetative growth. Such mycelia can assimilate nutrients but can not form a mushroom fruitbody (the product of generative growth}. A network of ceils coming from a single spore is called a monokaryon. As a rule, rnonokaryons are not capable of producing fertile spore-bearing mushrooms. When two compatible monokaryons encounter one another and mate, cytopiasmic and genetic material is exchanged. The resultant mycelium is a dikaryon that can produce fertile offspring in the form of mushrooms. Branching or networking between different dikaryotic strains is known as anastomosis. This process of recombination can occur at any stage of the cultivation process: on agar; on grain; or on bulk substrates. The crossing of different mushroom strains is analogous to the creation of hybrids in horticulture. Another method for starting cultures is the creation of single spore isolates and is accomplished by diluting spores in a volume of sterile water. This spore solution is further diluted into larger volumes of sterile water which is in Turn used to inoculate media dishes. In this way, cultivators can ob-

Figure 28 Four strains of Psilocybe cubensis mycelium: (clockwise, upper right) Matias Romero; Misantla; Amazonian; and Palenque.

28/The Mushroom Cultivator serve individual monokaryons and in a controlled manner institute a mating schedule for the development of high yielding strains. For cultivators interested solely in obtaining a viable culture, this technique is unnecessary and multispore germinations generally suffice. But for those interested in crossing monokaryotic strains and studying mating characteristics, this method is of great value. Keep in mind that for every one hundred spores, only an average of one to five germinate. For a more detailed explanation of strains and strain genetics, see Chapter XV. The greatest danger of doing concentrated multispore germinations is the increased possibility of contamination, especially from bacteria. Some bacteria parasitize the cell walls of the mycelium, while others stimulate spore germination only to be carried upon and to slowly digest the resulting mycelia. Hence, some strains are inherently unhealthy and tend to be associated with a high percentage of contamination. These infected spores, increase the likelihood of disease spreading To neighboring spores when germination is attempted in such high numbers. Many fungi, however, have developed a unique symbiotic relationship with other microorganisms. Some bacteria and yeasts actually stimulate spore germination in mushrooms that otherwise are difficult to grow in sterile culture. The spores of Cantharellus cibarius, the common and highly prized Chantrelle, do not germinate under artificial conditions, resisting the efforts of world's most experienced mycologists. Recenfly, Nils Fries (1979), a Swedish mycologist, discovered that when activated charcoal and a red yeast, Rhodotorula glutinis (Fres.) Harrison, were added to the media, spore germination soon followed. (Activated charcoal is recommended for any mushroom whose spores do not easily germinate.)

Figure 29

Psilocybe cubensis spores infected with rod shaped bacteria.

30/The

Cultivator

Figure 30 Splitting the mushroom stem to expose interior tissue.

Figure 31 Cutting into mushroom flesh with a cooled, sterilized scalpel.

Figure 32 Excising a piece of tissue for transfer into a petri dish.

32/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure 33 Bacteria growing from con- Figure 34 taminated mushroom mycelium. Note divergent ropey strands.

Figure 35 Intermediate linear type Note longitudinally radial fine strands mycelium).

Figure 36 Rhizomorphic mycelia with mentose (cottony) sector (of

Sterile Technique and Agar Culture/33 to be sectoring. A sector is defined solely in contrast to the surrounding, predominant There are two major classes of mycelial sectors: rhizomorphic and tomentose (cottony). Also, an intermediate type of mycelium occurs which grows linearly (longitudinally radial) hut does not have twisted strands of interwoven hyphae characterize the rhizomorphic kind. Rhizomorphic mycelium is more apt to produce primordia. Linear mycelium can also produce abundant primordia but this usually occurs soon after it forms rhizomorphs. Keep in mind, however, that characteristics of fruiting mycelium are often species specific and may not conform precisely to the categories outlined here. a dish That is largely covered with a cottony mycelia, a fan of strandy myceiia would be called a rhizomorphic sector, and vice versa. Sectors are common in mushroom culture and little is known as to their cause or function, it is clear that genetics, nutrition and age of the mycelium play important According to the growth of fluffy sectors is encouraged by broken and exploded which increase the availability of starch in the spawn media. Working with Stoller noted that although mycelial growth is faster at high pH levels (7.5) than at slightly acid pH levels (6.5), sectoring is more frequent. He found that sectors on grain could be re-

37 Psilocybe cubensis mycelia with cottony and rhizomorphic sectors. Note that primordia form abundantly on rhizomorphic mycelium but not on the cottony type.

Mushroom Cultivator

Figure 38

Hyphal aggregates of Agaricus bitorquis forming on malt agar media.

Figure 39 Primordia of

cubensis forming on malt agar media.

36/The Mushroom Cultivator Home cultivators can selectively develop mushroom strains by rating mycelia according to several characteristics. These characteristics are: growing vegetative 2. Purity of the 3. Cleanliness of the mites). 5. Number of primordia formed. 6. 8. Total yield. 9. Disease resistance. tolerance/sensitivity. Temperature limits. 12. Ease of harvesting. Using these characteristics, mushroom breeders can qualitatively judge strains and select ones over a period of time according to how well they conform to a grower's preferences. of primordia formed that grow to maturity. 7. Size, shape and/or color of fruitbodies. of cottony sectors. of competitor organisms (bacteria, molds and

4. Response time to primodia formation conditions.

Figure 40 stand of cubensis on malt agar media.

38/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure 41 cooker.

Filling test tubes with liquid agar media prior to sterilization in a pressure

Figure 42

Inoculating a test tube slant with a piece of mycelium.

Sterile Technique and Agar Culture/39 Although a strain may be preserved over the long term using this method, will it be as productive as when it was first stored? Other studies have concluded that strains saved for more than 5 under mineral showed distinct signs of degeneration while these same strains were just as productive years as the day they were Nevertheless, it is not unreasonable to based on these studies, that cultures can be stored up to two years without serious to their Four other methods of preservation include: the immersion of slants into liquid nitrogen (an expensive procedure); the inoculation of washed sterilized horse manure/straw compost that is then kept at 36-38 F. (See Chapter V on compost preparation); the inoculation of sawdust/bran media for wood decomposers (see section in Chapter III on alternative spawn media); or saving spores aceptically under refrigerated the simplest method for home Whatever method is used, remember that the mushroom's nature is to fruit, sporulate and evolve. Cultivation techniques should evolve the mushroom and the must selectively isolate and maintain promising strains as they develop. So don't be too surprised if five years down the line a stored strain poorly resembles the original in its fruiting or form.

Figure 43 Culture slant of healthy mycelium ready for cool storage.

Grain

CHAPTER III GRAIN CULTURE

Figure 44 Half gallon spawn jars at 3 and 8 days after inoculation

Mushroom Cultivator air exchange. This method works fine under sterile conditions the degree of filtration is not guaranteed. The best combination uses filter discs in conjunction with one piece screw top lids having a 3/8-1/2 inch diameter hole drilled into its center and fitting a narrow mouthed autoclavable container. The authors find the regular mouthed gallon mason jar to be ideal. (Note: These gallon jars are inoculated from quart masters, a technique soon to be discussed). only filter discs on wide mouth jars is not recommended due to the excessive evaporation from the grain medium. To produce grain spawn of 48-52% moisture use the formulas outlined below and autoclave in a pressure cooker for 1 hour at psi. Note that considerable variation exists between measuring cups, differing as much as in their volumes. Check the measuring cup with a graduated cylinder. Once standardized, fashion a "grain scoop" and a "water scoop" from a container to the proportions specified below.

Spawn Formulas QUART JARS
1 cup rye grain water
or

1/2 GALLON JARS 3 cups rye grain 3/4 cups water (approximately)

240 ml. grain ml.

600 ml. rye grain water 400-460 ml.water

Figure 46 Commercial spawn maker's autoclave.

Grain Culture/47

Figure 47

Pressure cooker of home

Figure 48 The rubber tire is a tool for the spawn laboratory. It is used to loosen grain spawn.

The above formulas fill a or a gallon jar to nearly of its capacity after autoclaving. In these formulas, chalk and gypsum can be added at a rate of parts by weight per parts of grain (dry weight). The ratio of chalk to gypsum is The addition of these elements to spawn is optional for most species but necessary when growing When these calcium buffers are used, add more water than listed above. Once the grain filled jars have been autoclaved, they should be in the sterile room and allowed to cool. Prior to this point, the room and air should be disinfected, either through the use of traditional cleaning methods, HEPA filters or both. Upon removing the warm jars from the pressure cooker or autoclave, shake them to loosen the and to evenly distribute wet and dry kernels. Shaking also prevents the kernels the bottom the jar from clumping. An excellent tool to help in this procedure is a car tire or padded chair. Having been carefully and disinfected, the tire should be mounted in an upright and stable position. The tire has a perfect surface against which to shake the jars, minimizing discomfort to the hands and reducing risk of injury from breakage. The tire will be used at another stage in grain culture, so it should be cleaned regularly. Paint shakers are employed by commercial spawn makers for this same purpose but they are inappropriate for the home CAUTION: ALWAYS INSPECT - JARS FOR CRACKS BEFORE SHAKING. When the grain jars have returned to room temperature, agar to grain inoculations can com-

Figure 49 Flaming the scalpel.

Figure 50 Cutting two wedges of mycelium colonized agar.

Figure 51 Inoculating sterilized grain.

Grain Culture/51 and a half weeks to colonize grain while cubensis grows through in a week to ten Here again, the use of the tire as a striking surface can be an aid to shaking. For slower growa common shaking schedule is on the 5th and 9th days after inoculation. The cultures be incubated in a semi-sterile environment at the temperature most appropriate for the species being (See Chapter XI). After transferring from agar to further transfers can be conducted from these arain cultures to more grain filled jars. A schedule of successive transfers from the inocugrain jar, designated through two more "generations" of transfers (G-2, G-3 respectiveresult in an exponential expansion of mycelial If for instance, jars were inoculated from an agar grown culture (G-1), they could inoculate 100 jars (G-2) which in turn could qo into jars As one can see, it is of critical importance that the first set of masters be pure for it may ultimately inoculate as many as jars! Inoculations beyond the third generation of transfers are not recommended. Indeed, if a contamination rate above is experienced at the second generation of transfers, then consider G-2 a terminal stage. These cultures can bulk substrates or be laid out in trays, cased and fruited. Grain-to-grain transfers are one of the most efficient methods of spawn making. This method is preferred by most commercial spawn laboratories specializing in Agaricus culture. They in turn sell grain spawn that is a second or third transfer to Agaricus farmers who use this to impregnate their compost. For the creation of large quantities of spawn, the grain-to-grain technique is far superior to agar-to-grain for both its ease and speed. However, every cultivator return to agar culture in order to maintain the purity of the strain.

Spawn master ready for transfer.

Figure 52b Spawn master after shaking.

Figure 52c Inoculating sterilized grain from spawn master.

52/The Mushroom

Figure 53 Spawn jar contaminated with Wet Spot bacteria, giving the grain a greasy appearance and emitting a sour odor.

Figure 54 Spawn with Heavy Growth, undesirable characteristic arising from cottony

54/The Mushroom Cultivator

ALTERNATIVE SPAWN MEDIA
Some mushroom species do not grow well on grain and are suited to alternative spawn media. Other mushrooms are grown on substrates incompatible with grain spawn. For example sawdust and bran are the preferred spawn materials for the cultivations of wood inhabitors such as Lentinus edodes and Flammulina Another spawn media has a perlite bran base. Perlite is rock, heated to and exploded like popcorn. The thin flakes of bran are sterilized while the perlife gives the medium structure. The recipes are:

Sawdust/Bran Spawn
4 parts sawdust (hardwood) 1 part bran (rice or wheat) the in for a least four allow to drain and then thoroughly mix in the bran. If the mixture has the proper moisture content, a firm squeeze results in a few drops between the fingers. Fill the material firmly to the neck of the spawn container (wide Japanese spawn makers bore a inch diameter down the center of the media into which they later insert their inoculum. Sterilize for 60-90 minutes at psi. Once cooled, inoculate from agar media, liguid emulsion, or grain. A grown bottle of sawdust bran spawn can also be used for further inoculations.

Perlite Spawn water 40 grams perlite 50 grams wheat bran 6 grams gypsum (calcium sulfate) grams calcium carbonate Screen the To remove the fine powder and particulates. Fill the container (small mouth) with the dry ingredients and mix well. Add the water and continue mixing until the ingredients are thoroughly moistened. Sterilize for one hour at psi. Inoculate from agar media or liquid emulsion.

Figure 56 Mycelium running through sawdust/bran spawn.

56/The Mushroom

Figure 57 Figure 58 Figure 59

Drawing up mycelium from culture dish with syringe. Syringe inoculation of sterilized grain. Eberbach container manufactured for liquid culture. Note bolt covering

inoculation hole. Figure 60 Drawing up liquid inoculum.

58/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure 61 bating in

Half gallon jars of spawn incuenvironment.

Figure 62 Gallon jars incubating in semisterile environment.

tion is mostly composed of (ethanol and acetone), in time acids are produced that cause the lowering of The substrate's pH. These products are favorable to the propagation of bacteria that thrive in aqueous environments. amounts of this fluid do not endanger the culture; excessive waste fluids (where the culture takes on a yellowish hue) are definitely detrimental. If this fluid collects in quantities, the sickens and eventually dies in its own wastes. Such excessive is indicative of one or a of the following conditions: Incubation at too high a temperature for the species being cultivated. Note that the ture within a spawn jar several degrees higher than the surrounding air temperature. 2. Over-aging of the cultures; too lengthy an incubation period. 3. Lack of gas exchange, encouraging anaerobic contamination. Contaminated jars should be sterilized on a basis. Do not dig out moldy cultures unless they have been autoclaved or if the identity of the contaminant in is known to be benign. Several contaminants in mushroom culture are pathogenic to humans, causing a variety of skin diseases and respiratory ailments. (See XIII on the contmaninants of mushroom culture). Autoclave contaminated jars for 30 minutes at 1 5 psi and clean soon after. Many autoclaved jars, once contaminated, re-contaminate within only a few days if their contents have been not discarded.

The Mushroom Growing Room/61

CHAPTER IV THE MUSHROOM GROWING ROOM

Figure 64 Small growing room utilizing shelves.

The Mushroom Growing Room/63

Structure
The basic structure of a mushroom house is made of wood or concrete block with a floor Because collects on the floor during the cropping cycle, provisions should be made for A wood floor can be covered with a heavy guage plastic. walls, ceilings and exnosed wood surfaces should be treated with a marine enamel or based paint. A white color enhances lighting and exposes any molds. The most important feature of a growing room is the ability to maintain a constant temperature. In this respect, insulation is critical. The walls should be insulated with R = or R = and the ceiling with R = 30 insulating materials. Fiberglass or work well but should be protected from the high humidities of the growing room to prevent water from saturating them. For This purpose, a 2-4 mil. plastic vapor barrier is placed between The and the interior An airtight room is an essential feature of the mushroom growing environment, preventing insects and spores from as well as giving the cultivator full control over the fresh air supply. During The or modification of all cracks, seams and joints should be carefully sealed. Many growers modify rooms in their own homes or basements. The main consideration for this approach is to protect the house (normally wood) from water damage and to make the growing chamber airtight. This is by plastic sheets stapled or taped to the walls, ceiling and with the seams and adjoining pieces well sealed. the room is adjacent to an exterior house wall where a wide temperature fluctuation condensation may form between the plastic and The wall. Within these larger structures, a plastic TenT or envelope room can be con-

Figure 66 Cultivation of mushrooms in an aquarium.

The Mushroom Growing Room/67

Figure 69 Psilocybe cased grain in a tray. Figure 70 Psilocybe pint and a half jars. Figure Psilocybe pint jars. Figure 72 plastic lined box.

cubensis fruiting on cubensis fruiting in cubensis fruiting in cubensis fruiting in

76/The Mushroom

Figure An inexpensive hygrometer for measuring relative humidity. the growing room with a lighting that provides even illumination to all areas and levels,

Flourescent light fixtures are the most practical and give the broadest coverage. These fixtures should be evenly spaced and mounted vertically on the side walls of the room or horizontally on the ceiling above The center isle. An alternative is to the lights on the underside of each tier of shelf or tray, at inches above the cropping surface. To eliminate the heat and consequent drying action caused by the fixture These can be removed and placed outside the room. The best type of light tube is one which most closely resembles light: i.e. one that has at least microwatts per nanometer per lumen of spectra (440-495 nm). In contrast, warm-white fluorescent light has only 40-50 and cool-white has 100-110 microwatts/nm/lum. Commercial lights meeting the photo-requirements of species mentioned in this book are the 65" kind manufactured by the Durotest Corporation and having a "color of 6500 K and the fluorescent at 5500 K. These color temperatures provide The proper amount of blue light for primordia formation in Psilocybe cubensis and in other species.

Environmental Monitoring Equipment
Few organisms are as fluctuations in the environment as mushrooms. A of a few degrees in temperature or humidity can dramatically influence the progression of fruiting and affect overall yields. To adequately monitor the growing environment, quality equipment is essential for accurate readings. This equipment should include maximum-minimum thermometers to gauge temperature fluctuations and a hygrometer or a sling psychrometer for measuring humidity. Hygrometers should be periodically calibrated with a sling psychrometer to insure accuracy. Thermomealso should be checked as there are occasional irregularities. Other more expensive but not absolutely essential equipment helpful to mushroom growers include: detectors; moisture meters; anemometers; and light measuring devices.

Compost Preparation/77

CHAPTER V COMPOST PREPARATION

Figure 82

Compost pile in a standard configuration.

84/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure 83

raw materials in a windrow.

microorganisms can be divided into two classes according To their oxygen requirements. Those needing oxygen to live and grow are called Aerobes while those living in the absence of oxygen are called Anaerobes. Each class has well defined characteristics. Aerobes decompose organic matter rapidly and completely with a corresponding tion of water and heat. This heat generation is called Thermogenesis. 2. Anaerobes partially decompose organic matter, producing not only and water, but also certain organic acids and several types of gases such as hydrogen sulfide and methane. Anaerobes generate less heat than aerobes. Examination of anaerobic areas of the compost reveals a yellowish, under-composted material that smells like rotten eggs. These areas in a compost pile are noticeably cooler and generally waterlogged. Anaerobic compost is unsuitable for mushroom growth. Since neither fresh horse manure nor straw based synthetics have the content, water must be added to these materials. The recommended levels for optimum composting are: Horse manure: 69-71 % Synthetic:

As long as the composting ingredients remain dry, the microorganisms lie dormant and cornposting does not take place. The first step in the composting process is the watering of the starting materials. The purpose of this or pre-wetting is to activate the microbes.

Figure 84 Figure 85 pile.

Ricking the compost pile. Chimney effect in a compost

Compost Preparation/87 is used by microorganisms, heat is set free and the air temperature rises. The warm air rent created rises to the top of the pile. This is the chimney effect. The factors affect the rate of internal air flow are pile size and moisture content and the differential between ambient air and internal pile temperatures.

Turning
A well built pile runs out of oxygen in 48 to 96 hours and then enters an anaerobic state. To prevent this, the pile should be disassembled and then reassembled. The purposes of this turning procedure are: To aerate the pile, 2. To add water lost 3. To mix in supplements as required. 4. To fully mix the preventing decomposition. As a consequence of microbial decomposition, the compost begins to shrink and becomes more compact. Coupled loose water gravitating downward and water by microbes in the inner active areas, this compaction closes the air spaces and stifles aerobic action, particularly in the core at the bottom center. Through use of a long stemmed thermometer reaching to the of The pile, the time of oxygen depletion can be monitored by watching temperature. When the temperature begins to drop, indicating a slowing of microbial it is time to turn the compost. anaerobic composting.

Figure 86

Turning

compost pile using wire mesh pile formers.

Mushroom Cultivator

Figure 90

Commercial compost turning machine.

Composting Tools
Since commercial growers work with many Tons of compost, a bucket loader is essential. They also use a specially designed machine for turning the piles. This compost turner can travel through a 200 foot pile in a little over one hour, mixing in supplements and adding water. Small scale cultivators can make compost without these machines. The following is a list of tools and facilities that are basic to compost preparation. A cement floor. Not absolutely necessary but highly desirable, a cement floor is easy to work on, prevents migration of water to the earth and prevents soil and unwanted soil organisms from contaminating the pile. Water leaching from the pile, a good indicator of compost is quite evident on a cement floor. If a cement floor is not available, a sheet of heavy plastic can be used. 2. Bobcat or small tractor loader with 3/4-1 bucket with If producing large amounts of compost, one of these machines saves time and labor. Not only do they make

Compost Preparation

Figure 91

Pile formers in use.

supplementing and pile building easier, they can be used to turn The pile. 3. Pile formers. These are constructed from 2 x 4's and plywood or planks to The dimensions desired for the compost pile One for each side is necessary. Standard size would be 4-5 feet high by 8 feet long. An to pile formers is a three sided bin. 4. Long handled pitchfork with 4 or 5 prongs. The basic tool in a compost yard, all compost were Turned wiTh pitchforks before the of compost turners and bucket loaders. 5. Flat bladed shovel. Used for handling supplements. or sprinkler. 6. Hose with spray

7. Thermometers. Although pile temperatures can be guaged by touch, a long stemmed thermometer gives readings.

Characteristics of the Compost at Filling
The materials undergo very distinct changes during Phase I. A judgment as to the suitability of the compost for filling is based on color, texture and odor. Gradual darkening of the and the pronounced scent of ammonia are the most obvious features. These and other characteristics provide important for judging the right time for filling the compost. (Note: these guideslines do not apply for a compost prepared by the Long Composting methods.) The compost is ready for 2. Straw is if: Compost is uniformly deep brown. long and fibrous, but can be sheared with some resistance. 3. When the compost is firmly squeezed, liquid appears between the fingers.

94/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure 92, 93 at filling can be sheared with moderate resisance. Figure 94 Compost at filling should release some when squeezed.

Compost

Figure 96

Small Phase II room designed for trays or bulk fill.

room. Certain basic principles should be adhered to when filling. These are: Fill the room as quickly as possible to minimize loss from The 2. Compress a long strawy compost and fill loosely a short dense compost. 3. If the compost appears dry, water lightly and evenly during filling. If water streams out when a handful is squeezed, don't fill. Add again as much gypsum, turn and wait a few days, 4. Fill all shelves and trays evenly and to the same depth. Avoid creating pockets of compact compost. Keep all compost within the container. No compost should hang over the sides. 5. Once finished, the floor should be cleaned of loose compost, then washed with water.

Depth of Fill
Up to a point there exists a direct relationship between the of compost filled per square foot and yield. In a fixed system, the of compost filled is usually the amount available for cropping. This normally holds true for trays, although some systems empty the trays at spawning and then refill 25% fewer trays than the number that was originally filled. This in high dry weight efficiencies without the complications of deep compost layers during Phase II. As a general rule, a fill depth of 8 inches provide nutrients as well as contribute to the ease of Phase II- At depths over 8 inches temperature stratification will to varying conditions the com-

Non-Composted

CHAPTER VI NON-COMPOSTED SUBSTRATES

Figure

fruiting outdoors in a bed of fresh alder chips.

Mushroom Cultivator

he use non-composted and semi-composted materials as mushroom growing substrates is common among commercial growers of and Stropharia. Because of the simplicity and ease by which they are produced, these substrates are ideal for the home cultivator. The advantages of these substrates are the rapid preparation times and the easily standardized mixtures formulated from readily available raw These substrates can be treated by sterilization, pasteurization or used untreated in their natural

NATURAL CULTURE
For most people mushroom implies an indoor process employing sterile culture techniques and a controlled growing environment. Although this has been the natural progression of events for commercial cultivators and is the only way to grow year round crops, it need be the sole method available to the home cultivator. For hundreds of years home growers have made up outdoor beds and have enjoyed harvesting seasonal crops of mushrooms. In fact, most mushrooms now being grown commercially were originally grown using natural culture techniques. By observing wild mushrooms fruiting in their natural one can begin to understand their growth requirements. To fully illustrate how this methodology works, the development of natural culture for Psilocybe will be used as an example. cyanescens grows along fence lines and hedge rows, in tall rank in berry thickets, in well mulched rhododendron beds, in piles of wood chips and shavings and in ecologically disturbed areas. In many instances, the mushrooms are found growing in but upon close examination of the underlying mycelial network, it is apparent that they are feeding on wood or other cellulosic material. Due to the thick strandy mycelium of cyanescens, it is relatively easy to locate and gather colonized

Figure

Virgin spawn:

mycelium on a wood chip.

Non-Composted pieces of substrate. These pieces are considered virgin spawn and are used to inoculate materials. Freshly chips of alder, maple and fir all support healthy mycelial growth. Because alder is high in sugar content, without resins and abundant in northwestern North America, it been selected as the primary substrate material. Even though such a spawn is not absolutely clean, mycelium colonizes fresh substrate pieces so rapidly that there is little risk of contamination. order to prepare inoculum for the following year, the inoculated chips are kept indoors in gallon jars or other protective sufficient moisture, minimal air exchange and normal indoor temperatures, the mycelium soon spreads throughout the fresh chips. For the best results a ratio of virgin spawn to fresh chips is recommended. As one jar becomes fully permeated, it can be used to produce more spawn. In the spring freshly cut wood branches are then mixed with the fully colonized inoculum and made into a ridge bed directly on the ground. Experience has shown irregular chips approximately 1 -3 inches long give results than ground material such as Fresh chips not only provide a greater nutrient and water reservoir, have substantial surface area for primordia formation. Strong mycelial growth can be sustained on wood chips for a prolonged period of time. (Mycelial growth on fresh sawdust is at first rapid and rhizomorphic but soon slows and loses vitality). The ridge beds should be made inches deep and 2 feet wide. To insure a humid microclimate for the bed should be made under rhododendrons or other leafy ornamentals, along a fence or hedge row, or on grass which is allowed to grow up through the bed.

Figure 103 branches.

Chipping freshly cut alder

Mushroom Cultivator The bed must never be placed where it is exposed to direct tected that rainfall can not reach it. but it not be so well pro-

During the spring and summer the colonizes The fresh substrate which should be covered with plastic or cardboard to prevent drying. A weekly watering helps to keep The moisture content high. In the the bed is uncovered and given a heavy watering Twice a week, buf with care not to flood it. When the mushrooms begin to fruit, watering should be gauged according to enviand natural precipitation. As long the temperature stays above freezing the mushrooms will grow continuously. If a freeze is expected, the beds can with a covering. Extended freezing weather ends outdoor cropping until the following year. Throughout the winter the beds can be protected by a layer of straw, cardboard or new chips topped plastic. This is important for harsh climates. Other possibilities include making the bed inside a cold frame or plastic greenhouse. Certain regions of the country like the Northwest are better suited to natural culture than others. In this respect it is desirable to use a local adapted to local conditions. In To ouTdoor culTivation, the wood chips can be filled into trays and brought inside. Once the primary bed has been established it can be likened To a perennial which is nature of mushroom mycelium. Indoor spawn preparation and incubation become unnecessary. With each successive year chips can be drawn from the original bed and used as inoculum. This means the total bed area can be by five on an annual basis. (See Figure of fruiting indoors in tray of alder chips).

Figure shiitake

Oak dowels before and after colonization by mycelium.

Figure 105 Shiitake plug inserted into oak log.

Figure 106 Stacked arrangement of shiitake logs in a greenhouse.

Figure 107 Shiitake culoutdoors under shade cloth.

They are also being utilized with some modifications by commercial shiitake growers in the United States. The development of these mushroom specific substrates follows certain defined guidelines. The basic raw is cellulose, a major constituent of straw, cardboard or paper wastes, wood chips, or other natural plant fibers. Any of these materials should be chopped or shredded, never so finely as to eliminate inherent structural qualities. This base approximately 80% of the total substrate mixture. To these basic substrate materials are added various nutrient supplements and growth stimulators in meal or flour form. By supplying carbohydrates, vitamins and the supplements serve to enhance the yield capabilities of the substrate base. Protein sources include concentrates like soya meal or soya flour, wheat germ and brewer's yeast. The most suitable carbohydrate sources are starchy materials such as rice, potatoes, corn and wheat. Some supplements are well balanced and provide both carbohydrates and proteins. Examples of these are bran, oatmeal and grains of all types. The number of possible is extensive and need not be limited to those listed. The supplements comprise approximately 8-25% of the total dry weight. The addition of gypsum at a rate of 5% of the dry weight can improve the structure and porosity. It should be considered an optional ingredient. Japanese growers of auricula and allies, and ostreatus have a standard substrate formula consisting of 4 parts sawdust and 1 part bran, The saw-

Figure 108

Photograph of shiitake mushrooms growing on a sawdust block.

Mushroom Cultivator dust can be aged up to one year, which is said To improve its moisture holding capacity. Presoaking the sawdust prior to mixing in the bran is an effective way to achieve the required 60% moisture optimum. A firm squeeze of the mixture should produce only a few drops of water between the if the mixture has much moisture, loose water collects in the bottom of substrate container, a condition predisposing the culture to contamination. The can be filled into a number of different containers. Mason polypropylene jars or high heat-resistant polyethylene bags are commonly employed. The containers are closed and sealed with a microporous filter. They are sterilized at 1 5 psi for 60-90 minutes. After sterilization the containers are cooled to ambient and inoculated. The inoculum can be either grain spawn or sawdust-bran spawn. During incubation substrate filled bags can be molded to the desired cropping form. Common shapes are round mini-logs or rectangular blocks. Some growers mold the Figure the Enoke Mushroom, fruiting in mason jar containing sawdust mixture. Figure Autoclavable plastic bag and microporous filter disc, known in the Orient as the Space Bag.

Non-Composted sawdust into a cylindrical shape. inches long and 4-5 inches in diameter. The fully onized are stacked together on their sides with the ends exposed as the cropping surfaces. An alternative is to slit the bag lengthwise in four places, exposing the substrate to air while retaining plastic as a humidity hood. If growing in jars, and fruit from the exposed surface at the mouth of the jars.

GROWING ON PASTEURIZED STRAW
commercial mushroom production one of the most used substrate materials is cereal straw. Not only does straw form the basis for mushroom composts, but it is also used posted as the sole ingredient for the growth of various mushroom species. Although all types of straw are more or less suitable, most growers use wheat because of its coarse fiber and its availability. The straw should be clean, free from molds and unspoiled by any decomposition. Preparation simply chopping or shredding the dry straw into 1 -3 inch pieces. This can be done with a wood a garden compost shredder or a power mower. The shredding increases moisture absorption by expanding the available surface area. Shredding also increases the density of the mass.

Figure Equipment needed for pasteurization of straw: 55 gallon drum; gas burner; shredder; hardware cloth basket and straw.

Cultivator Figure Figure wire basket. Figure Figure Shredding the straw. Filling the shredded straw into the Checking the water temperature. Draining the pasteurized straw.

Non-Composted The chopped straw is treated pasteurization which can be carried out with live steam or water. Presoaked to approximately 75% the straw is filled into a tunnel or steam room as dein the composting chapter. It is steamed for 2-4 hours at then cooled To and spawned. An program for hours at after the high temperature pasteurization. This program is designed to promote beneficial microbial growth giving the straw a higher degree of selectivity for mushroom mycelium. The method best suited to the home cultivator is the hot water bath. Figure illustrates a simple system utilizing a 55 gallon drum and a propane burner. The drum is half filled with water that is then heated to °F. Chopped dry straw is placed into the wire mesh basket and submerged in the hot water. (A weight is needed to keep The straw After minutes the straw is removed from the water and allowed to drain. It is very to let all loose water run off. Once drained, the straw is spread out on a clean surface and allowed to cool to 80 F. (or less), at which point it can be spawned. The straw is evenly mixed with spawn and filled into trays, shelves or plastic bags. Some compression of the straw into the container is desirable because the cropping efficiency will be increased. The use of plastic bags is a simple and efficient way to handle straw substrates. A five gallon bag (1 -2 mils thick) is well suited to most situations. Two dozen nail sized holes equally spaced around the bags provide aeration. Upon full colonization, the mycelia of species like

Inoculating grain spawn onto the cooled pasteurized straw.

Mushroom

Figure Pasteurized straw stuffed into plastic bags which are then perforated with nail size holes. and cubensis actually hold the straw together, at which time the bag can be removed. Another alternative is to perforate or strip the bag from the top or side to easy cropping. Wheat straw prepared and pasteurized in this manner can be used to grow Pleurotus Stropharia cyanescens and cubensis. It is quite possible that other species can utilize this substrate or a modification of it. Studies with Pleurotus ostreatus have demonstrated yield increases with the addition of 20% grass meal prior to substrate Supplementation of the straw a full spawn run is another method of boosting yields (See Chapter VII.) Bono obtained a yield increase of 85% with Pleurotus flabellatus by adding cottonseed meal to the colonized straw. The optimum rate of addition was grams per kilogram of dry straw 22 grams crude protein per kilogram straw). Bono also found supplementation increased the protein content and intensified the flavor of the mushrooms.

Spawning and Spawn Running in

CHAPTER VII SPAWNING AND SPAWN RUNNING IN BULK SUBSTRATES

Figure

Mycelium running through

Spawning and Spawn Running in Bulk

Figure 120 straw.

Psilocybe

mycelium running through pasteurized wheat

If the substrate has been filled into shelves, the spawn is broadcast over the surface and mixed in with a pitchfork or by hand. With trays, a similar method can be or alternatively, the substrate can be dumped out on a clean surface, mixed with spawn and then replaced in the trays. Substrates from a bulk room are removed, mixed with spawn and then placed into the chosen container. It is common procedure to level and compress the substrate to avoid dehydration caused by excessive air penetration. The degree of compression depends upon substrate structure. Long, airy can be compacted more than short, dense ones. Commercial tray growers compact the compost into the trays with a hydraulic press so that the compost surface resembles a table top. This enables the application of an even casing layer.

Environmental

Conditions

The required environmental conditions for spawn running are very specific and must be closely monitored. Substrate temperatures are controlled by careful manipulation of the surrounding air temperature. Heating and cooling are but not absolutely essential the outside climate is extreme. A well insulated room with provisions for fresh air entrance and exhaust air exit should be adequate for most situations. The steady or periodic recirculation of room air by means of a small fan helps to keep an even temperature throughout the room and guards against calized especially in the uppermost containers. Humidity is extremely important at this and must be held If the humidity falls below this level, water evaporates from the Jbstrate surface to the detriment of the growing mycelium. Humidification can be accomplished by steam humidifiers or by cold water misters. If steam is used, care must be taken that the increase in r temperature does not drive the substrate temperature above the range. One common

The Casing

CHAPTER VIII THE CASING LAYER

Figure 121 fruiting in tray of pasteurized straw. Note mushrooms formed only on cased half.

The Casing

Figure 122 Sphagnum peat and limestone flour needed for casing. The development of casings based on peat moss has practically eliminated the use of soil in mushroom culture. Peat is highly decomposed plant matter and has a pH in the 3.5-4.5 range. Since this acidic condition precludes many contaminants from colonizing it as a substrate, peat is considered to be a fairly starting material. Peat based casings rarely require tion. But because peat is too acidic for most mushrooms, the addition of some form of calcium buffering agent like limestone is essential. "Liming" also causes the aggregation of the peat particles, giving peat a structure similar to a clay/loam soil. A coarse fibrous peat is preferred because holds its structure better than a fine peat. In essence, the of sphagnum peat conform to the guidelines of a good casing layer. Buffering agents are used To counter the acidic effects of and other casing Calcium carbonate is most commonly used and comes in different forms, some more desirable Than others. Chalk: Used extensively in Europe, chalk is soft in texture and holds water well. Chunks of chalk, ranging from one inch thick to dust, improve casing structure and continuously leach into the casing, giving long lasting buffering action. 2. Limestone Flour: Limestone flour is calcitic ground to a fine powder. It is the buffering agent in the United States. Limestone flour is 97% mined from rock quarries and used by Agaricus growers with less than 2% magnesium.

Mushroom Cultivator

Figures 124 & 125 Casing a of grain spawn. First the fully colonized grain is carefully broken up and evenly distributed into the tray. As an option, a layer of partially moistened vermiculite can be placed along the bottom of the tray to absorb excess water. If the grain appears to have uncolonized cover the container with plastic and let the spawn recover for 24 hours before casing. Otherwise, can proceed immediately after the spawn has been laid out.

The Casing easily be overwatered, thereby stifling mycelial growth; and secondly, the mycelium breaks through the surface at different times, resulting in irregular pinhead formation. When applying the casing to large areas, "depth rings" can be an effective means to insure evenness. These rings are out of flat metal or six inch PVC pipe, cut to any depth. They are placed on the substrate and covered with the casing, which is then leveled using the rings as a guide. Once the casing is level and the rings are removed. Although the casing layer must be even, the surface of The casing should remain rough and porous, with small "mountains and valleys". The surface is a key to optimum pinhead formation and will be discussed in more detail in the next chapter.

Casing Colonization
Environmental conditions after casing should be the same as during spawn running. Substrate temperatures are maintained within the optimum range for growth; relative humidity is and fresh air is to a minimum. (Fresh air should only be introduced to offset overheating). The build-up of in the room is beneficial to mycelial growth and is controlled by an airtight room and tightly sealed fresh air damper. the entrance of fresh air cannot be controlled, a

126

Depth rings used for even casing application on bulk substrates.

Mushroom Cultivator

Figure 127 moisture.

Mycelial growth (Agaricus

into casing with optimum

sheet of plastic should be placed over the casing. This plastic sheet also prevents moisture the casing.

from

Soon after casing, substrate surge upward due to the hampered diffusion of metabolic gases which would normally conduct heat away. This surge is an indication of mycelial vitality and is a positive sign if the room temperature can be controlled. This temperature rise can be anticipated by lowering either the temperature of the substrate prior to casing or lowering The air temperature of the room after casing. Within three days of application, mycelium should be growing into the casing layer. Once mycelial growth is firmly established, the casing is gradually watered up to its optimum moisture holding capacity. This is accomplished by a series of light waterings with a misting nozzle over a two to four day period (depending upon the depth of the casing). Deeper casings require more waterings. Optimum moisture capacity should be achieved at least two days before the mycelium reaches the surface. IT EXTREMELY IMPORTANT THAT THE DO NOT DAMAGE THE SURFACE STRUCTURE OF THE CASING. Heavy direct watering can the casing surface, closing all the pore spaces and effectively sealing it. The growing mycelium is then trapped within the casing layer and may not break through it at all. The example of panning is a soil turned to mud. To repair a casing surface damaged by watering, the top 14 inch can be reopened by a technique called "scratching". The tool used is simply a 1 x 2 x 24 inch board with parallel rows of

The Casing

Figure Mycelial growth (Psilocybe cubensis) into casing with optimum moisture. nails (6 penny) slightly offset relative to one another. With this "scratching stick", the casing is lightly ruffled prior to the mycelium breaking through to the surface. After The surface has been scratched, the casing should be its final waterings prior to pinning. A modified application of this technique is "deep scratching". When the mycelium is midway through the casing, the entire layer is thoroughly ruffled down to the bulk The agitated and broken mycelium reestablishes itself and within three to four days it completely colonizes the casing. The result is an early, even and prolific pinhead formation. Before using this technique, the grower must be certain that the substrate and casing are free of competitor molds and nematodes.

Casing Moisture and

Appearance

Moisture within the casing layer has a direct effect on the diameter and degree of branching in growing mycelium. These are indicators of and can be used as a guide to proper watering. I- Optimum Casing Moisture: Mushroom mycelium thrives in a moist humid casing, sending minute branching networks. These expand and grow, absorbing water, and oxygen from the near saturated casing. This mycelial growth is characterby many thick, white rhizomorphic strands that branch into mycelia of smaller diameters and correspondingly smaller, finer capillaries. The overall aspect is lush and

Strategies for Mushroom

CHAPTER IX STRATEGIES FOR MUSHROOM FORMATION (PINHEAD INITIATION)

I

canning electron micrograph of

cubensis primordia.

Mushroom

Figure

Overlay.

Mycelium breaking through the casing surface early should be lightly sprinkled with casing. Uneven growth through casing layer is usually an indication of a casing with irregular depths, By "patching" shallow areas, an even mycelial spread is assured. Note that the more even the distribution of the mycelium in the valleys of the casing's the more even the pin-set and the greater the first and second flushes. The exact for initiation varies with the strain and according to the experience of the individual grower. Some strains continue to grow for a period after the initial temperature shock whereas stop immediately. For this reason, some initiate when 20% of the valleys show mycelial growth while others wait until 90% are run through with mycelium. Normally hours from the time the is first visible in valleys, the initiation sequence is started. The first step in the pinhead initiation process is to lower the substrate and air temperature from the mycelial growth optimum to the fruiting range. This temperature "shock" is accomplished by ventilation with a large volume of cool fresh air, lowering the room's temperature to a point 5-20 below the optimum for spawn running. (For Agaricus this would mean ping air temperature from 70 °F. to 64 Whatever the air temperature may be, the bed temperature is normally several degrees warmer. The length of time needed to affect this change is determined by the total volume of substrate and the temperature of the air being introduced. Within 48 hours, the substrate temperature fall to fruiting temperatures, effectively slowing vegetative growth. This change signals to the mycelium that it is time to fruit.

Strategies for Mushroom

Figure

Cased grain culture of Agaricus

showing overlay and

Fresh air also removes high of carbon dioxide and other metabolic gases from the room. Since Agaricus brunnescens does not pin properly at concentrations above 2000 lowering the carbon dioxide content of The room's air to under 2000 ppm is critical. The inhibitory effect of carbon dioxide on mushroom formation gives Agaricus growers a high degree of control over the pinning process. Not until carbon dioxide is removed will pinheads form. carbon dioxide levels remain high, the mycelium will totally cover the casing surface, a condition called overlay. The mycelial mat formed by overlay the casing impervious to water and produces few pinheads. Overlay also occurs if the casing surface is too dry, the humidity (rH) is too low or the air temperature remains Too high. can be counteracted by patching, but the cause must be diagnosed and carefully corrected if the culture is to be revived. Few flushes will be as great from a casing with overlay as from a casing properly managed.

Stage III: Primordia Formation (Knotting)
Once substrate temperatures have been lowered and begin to form. Maintain: levels have been reduced, at levels less than

A constant fresh air supply to remove metabolic gases, and ppm.

2. A constant temperature in the growing room that is within the fruiting range-

Strategies for Mushroom

Figure 132, 133 & Three day pinhead development sequence in Agaricus Change-over from Stage III to Stage IV occurs within this frame.

Mushroom Cultivator

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PRIMORDIA FORMATION AND YIELD
The importance of the primordia formation period can not be over-emphasized. For maximum yields an optimum number of pinheads must be set, and brought to harvest. Certain relationships exist the pinning process and yields. These are: 1. During the primordia formation period, pinheads for the first and second flush are being generated. The second flush primordia are present as thickened knots which develop after the flush is harvested. Once the first flush is off the beds, the second set of primordia begin to and within days attain button size. Because of the yield is normally harvested from the first two the few days of pinhead initiation are the most critical in the growing of mushrooms. Hence, all environmental factors must be carefully monitored to insure the best possible pin-set.

Figure 135 Three pinheads of post. Note mycelial knot in upper center.

forming on cased section of com-

Environmental Factors/151

Figure affected by high concentration. Note long stems and caps. Figure 138 The effect of dry air on cubensis caps, a condition known as "scaling".

Mushroom Cultivator

Figure Rosecomb on Psilocybe cubensis, an abnormality caused contact with chemicals, especially those that are petroleum based.

Figure 140 Fruitbody abnormality occasionally seen in Psilocybe cubensis.

er the overall cropping Stunted undeveloped mushrooms are also cleared from the cropping surface between breaks with care not to disturb The casing. Small dead pinheads should be left in place and cause little harm. (As a an aborted mushroom can be removed as long as the casing is not touched in the process.) At no time should the casing be over-handled in an to clean. Such handling can spread disease spores and damage subsequent pin formation.

Movement
Air movement in the growing room is designed to create an even flow across all levels of cropping surface. This even airflow counteracts temperature stratification and dead air pockets by equalizing the environment of the room. this manner the crop can be managed as a whole, giving the grower greater control over the cropping cycle. During the pin initiation period fresh air is introduced into the room to remove metabolic gases produced by the mushroom Although gas production is reduced once this vegetative

Environmental

Figure Bacteria! blotch parasitizing brunnescens. Figure 142 of Characteristic cubensis response light.

growth has been slowed, the maturing mushrooms create more carbon dioxide, the removal of which requires a continuous of fresh air. The number of these air changes varies depending upon the air/bed ratio and the reguirement of the mushroom species being grown. Agaricus needs only half the of fresh air required by Agaricus brunnescens. A common rate for Agaricus brunnescens is 4-6 changes per hour. For more tolerant species such as Psilocybe cubensis, 2-3 changes per hour is sufficient. (The most accurate method for determining fresh air requirements employs the multiple gas detector. This instrument measures content of the air in parts per million (ppm), from 300 (natural level) up to 20.000 See Appendix for sources.) Because many mushrooms are sensitive to carbon dioxide, the physical development of the mushroom can also be used as a guide. High environments produce long stems and small underdeveloped caps in Agaricus brunnescens and Pleurotus ostreatus. Pleurotus exhibits similar symptoms in conditions of low intensity. general, too much fresh air is preferable to insufficient air supply. However, fresh air displaces the existing room air which is then exhausted from the room. Unless this fresh air is preconditioned To meet the requirements of the species, one will be constantly disrupting the growing environment and thereby over-working the heating and humidification systems. For this reason the air circulation system should be designed to recirculate the room air. This is accomplished by a mixing box with an adjustable damper that proportions fresh and recirculated air. In this regard, tolerant species give the grower a distinct advantage in maintaining the correct environment because they need fresh air for growth. An important effect of air circulation and fresh air supply the evaporation of moisture from the cropping surface. Excessive humidity without adequate air movement and evaporation retards mushroom development. Saturated stagnant air pockets are also breeding areas for contaminants

Growing Parameters for Various Mushroom

CHAPTER XI GROWING PARAMETERS FOR VARIOUS MUSHROOM SPECIES

Figure

fruiting in a bed of wood chips.

Crowing

for Various Mushroom

SPECIES: Agaricus Saccardo = Agaricus rodmanii Peck = Agaricus campestris var. edulis Agaricus edulis (Vitt.) Moller and

Figure 144

radial) mycelium of Agaricus bitorquis.

STRAINS: Horst B30 (The first commercial strain to be developed by Gerda Fritsche at the Dutch Mushroom Research Center in Horst, Holland). Horst K26, K32 (These are two second generation strains from B30 and are distinctive from it in that they fruit earlier, higher yields and have slightly longer stems. Spawn of this species is now available from Amycel.) COMMON NAME: Rodman's Agaricus GREEK ROOT: comes from the greek word which originated with a Scythian people called Agari who were well versed in the use of medicinal plants and employed a fungus called probably a polypore in the genus The species epithet means having two rings, for the double annulus that so distinguishes this species from close relatives like Agaricus the Meadow Mushroom.

Mushroom Cultivator

SPECIES: Agaricus brunnescens Peck

Agaricus bisporus

Sing.

Figure 145 STRAINS:

Agaricus brunnescens fruiting in trays of compost. or Brown Variety (var. bisporus) White Variety Cream Variety (var.

COMMON NAME: The Button Mushroom. GREEK ROOT: Agaricus comes from the greek word which scholars believed originated with a Scythian people called Agari who were well versed in the use of medicinal plants and employed a fungus called probably a polypore in the genus The species epithet brunnescens comes from the latin or brown. Literally, the name means the fungus that becomes brown, probably referring to the color change of the flesh upon bruising. Also called Agaricus bisporus for the two spored basidia populating the gill faces. GENERAL DESCRIPTION: A robust, thick fleshed Agaricus species, with thin gills that are pinkish when young, and darkening to sepia and then chocolate brown in age. The cap is characteristically brownish, whitish or cream colored. The cap surface is smooth to appressed squamulose and dry. This species has a short, thick stern which is adorned with a persistent membranous annulus from a well developed partial veil. Its spores are chocolate brown in mass.

Growing Parameters for Various Mushroom NATURAL HABITAT: Naturally found in soils enriched with dung, on compost piles and in horse stables. A temperate species, distributed, A. from over much of the northern hemisphere outside the tropical zone.

GROWTH PARAMETERS
Types: Moderately rhizomorphic; dingy white, sometimes with brownish hues. Spawn Medium: Rye grain buffered with calcium carbonate and/or calcium sulfate. See Chapter Fruiting Nitrogen enriched wheat straw and/or manure based compost balanced to moisture content. This species also fruits well on rye grain covered with an unsterilized peat based casing layer. Method of Preparation: See Chapter V on compost preparation. Pasteurization achieved through exposure to live steam for 2 hours at °F. throughout the substrate. Compost should be filled a depth of 6-12 inches.

Figure 145a brunnescens fruiting on cased rye grain spawn.

Figure 145b Characteristic Agaricus brunnescens mycelium.

Mushroom

SPECIES:

ex Fr.) Gray

Figure 146

Fully mature Coprinus comatus fruiting in a tray of compost.

STRAINS: On deposit at the American Type Culture Collection and available through various ture banks, both commercial and private. COMMON NAME: The Mane. GREEK AND LATIN ROOTS: Coprinus comes from the Greek word meaning dung and comatus from the Latin "coma" meaning shaggy or adorned with hair tufts. The genus is noted for the several species that grow on dung and for gills. The species epithet describes the shaggy texture of the cap's surface. GENERAL DESCRIPTION: Cap medium to large in size, whitish, ovoid when young, soon elongating upwards and becoming parabolic. As the mushroom matures and spores are produced, the cap begins to disintegrate from the margin's edge by an autodigestive process known as deliquescence. The disintegrating portions progressively darken and eventually The cap surface is

Growing Parameters for Various Mushroom

147-150 tray of compost.

Four day developmental sequence of Coprinus comatus fruiting in a

Mushroom Cultivator

SPECIES: Flammulina velutipes

ex Fr.) Sing. ex Fr.)

Figure

fruiting in tray. from commercial and of Enoke cultivation

STRAINS: Many wild and domesticated strains of F. are private stocks. (See Appendix). The Japanese have remained at The with two popular commercial strains, and COMMON NAME: Enoke; Winter Mushroom; or Velvet Stem.

LATIN ROOT: Flammulina comes from the latin word or flame for the lowish orange to reddish orange color of the cap. The species epithet velutipes is the conjunction of two latin words, the adjective meaning covered with fine hairs and the noun or foot. GENERAL DESCRIPTION: typically small, reddish orange to reddish brown, at first hemispherical, soon plane. The cap margin is often irregularly shaped. The gills are yellowish tinged. In wild the stem is densely fibrillose, velvety, short and tough. In culture, however, the stems are long and smooth. A partial veil is absent. Its spores are whitish in mass.

Mushroom Cultivator

Figure 152

pinheads of grams per 800 ml. bottle. Maximum

Yield Potential: Average commercial yields are yields are nearly 600 grams per 800 ml. bottle.

Moisture Content of Mushrooms: 92% water; 8% dry matter. Nutritional Content: Reports from to protein (dry 107 milligrams of niacin per 100 grams dry F. Zadrazil found that colonization of straw by this species decreases its digestibility for as fodder. This contrasts with the effects of and whose presence on straw markedly increases its Like many wood degrading fungi, an anti-tumor antibiotic has been isolated from F. velutipes and is appropriately called flammulin. Comments: F. tends to form mycelial "pellets" soon after colonizing a substrate. This phenomenon makes liquid culture techniques more difficult. Japanese researchers found that the addition of 5% corn and 2% malt to a solution inhibits the formation of these troublesome pellets. on sawdust/bran beds can be precipitated when pieces of a fruitbody are added to this solution. Shiio found one could induce the early formation

Growing Parameters for Various Mushroom

Figure jar.

in plastic

of fruitbodies with a technique whereby fresh pieces of Flammulina velutipes mixed directly into liquid spawn and then introduced into the sawdust/bran medium. Not only was The fruiting process the spawning period was cut in half and yield was nearly quadrupled a year's time. Using this same technique with Pleurotus yields were increased over and above the norm by a factor of three. Total production in case, equalled as much as of the substrate on a dry weight basis. An analogous technique was developed by Urayama who discovered that free of fresh F. velutipes mushrooms to of related species caused Genetic Characteristics: Basidia Tetrapolar (4-spored), forming haploid spores; bifactorially hetSingle spore isolates capable of producing fruitbodies. are faster growing and by clamp connections. Mycelium can produce oidia, self sectioning chains of cells with similar functions as spores. See Chapter XV. For further information consult: H. Tonomura, 1974. Academic Press, New York. in The and Cultivation of Edible

Mushroom Cultivator

SPECIES: Lentinus edodes (Berk.) Sing.

Figure 154 oak logs.

Lentinus

the shiitake mushroom, fruiting on

Plate 1

Psilocybe cubensis mycelium.

Plate 2

mycelium.

Plate 3

Lepista

mycelium.

Plate 4

Psilocybe tampensis mycelium.

Plate 5

Compost raw materials during

Plate 6

Compost raw materials at

Plate 7

Compost raw materials at filling.

Plate 8 Compost Note whitish colonies of

for spawning.

Plate 16

Psilocybe cyanescens mycelium running through moist alder sawdust.

Plate

cyanescens fruiting on alder chips.

Plate 18

cubensis fruiting on cased, pasteurized wheat straw.

Plate 19

Panaeolus

fruiting on cased wheat straw.

Plate 20 the Blue Green Mold and Cladosporium, the Dark Green Mold, growing on malt agar media.

Plate 21 the Green Mold, growing on malt agar media.

Plate 22 the Forest Green Mold, contaminating the casing

Plate 23 the Brown Mold, contaminating the casing

Mushroom Cultivator

SPECIES:

ex Fr.) Cooke nuda (Fr.) and Smith Tricholoma (Fr.) Kummer

Figure 155

Mycelium of Lepista nuda.

STRAINS: Available from commercial and private slocks. The American Type Culture has several strains. Although few spawn companies sell strains of tissue and spore cultures are easily obtained from wild specimens. Nevertheless, there are a limited number of productive strains currently in circulation.

COMMON NAME: The
LATIN AND GREEK ROOTS: Lepista comes from the greek which means scale. On the other hand, the species epithet nuda comes from or naked. The name Lepista nuda constitutes a contradition of terms, literally translating as the scaly smooth mushroom. GENERAL DESCRIPTION: Cap typically violet when fresh, becoming buff brown in drying; smooth, without hairs; dry; convex or broadly convex to plane in age. The cap margin is inrolled or incurved when young and simply decurved at maturity. The gills are a pale violet color, sometimes developing brownish hues in age and are adnexed or ascending in their attachment to the stem. The stem is equal overall but bulbous at the base and covered with fine fibrils over much of its surface.

Crowing Parameters for Various

SPECIES: Panaeolus and Broome = Copelandia cyanescens (Berk. & Br.) Sing.

Figure 156

Panaeolus

fruiting on cased straw.

SPECIES: Panaeolus =

and Broome venenosus

Figure 157 outdoors on horse STRAINS: Fruiting

subbalteatus chip compost.

are easily obtained from wild specimens.

COMMON NAME: The Belted Cap Panaeolus. GREEK ROOT: Panaeolus is Greek for "all variegated" in reference to the spotted appearance of the The species name subbalteatus comes from the conjunction of the prefix meaning almost or somewhat and or belt-like, for the characteristic color zonation that forms along the margin of the cap in drying.

Growing Parameters for Various Mushroom

SPECIES:

(Jacq. ex Fr.) Kummcr

Figure 158 Fully mature Pleurotus ostreatus mushrooms fruiting on straw. STRAINS: Strains of Pleurotus are available from commercial and private stocks. The American Type Culture Collection, which sells cultures to educational organizations and research has stock cultures of several wild and domesticated strains. is the standard strain used by the European Pleurotus industry and is synonymous with ATCC's-38546. COMMON NAME: The Oyster Mushroom. LATIN AND GREEK ROOTS: Pleurotus comes from the greek which means formed laterally or in a sideways position, referring to the lateral position of the stem relative to the cap. The species epithet ostreatus refers to its oyster shell-like appearance and color. GENERAL DESCRIPTION: Cap tongue maturing to a shell shaped form, 50-1 50 mm. in diameter; whitish to gray to blue gray overall. is a light determined factor in species). The flesh is thin and white. The margin is even and occasionally wavy. The are white, decurrent

Mushroom

Figures 159-162 wheat straw.

Four day developmental sequence of

ostreatus fruiting on

and broadly spaced. The stem is attached in an off-centered fashion and is short age. Its spores are whitish to lilac gray in mass.

first and absent in

NATURAL HABITAT: A wood decomposing, or parasitic fungus. grows abundantly on standing and fallen alder, cottonwood and maple. This species is especially numerous in river valleys and fruits in the fall, early winter and spring across much of temperate North America.

Mushroom

SPECIES: Psilocybe cubensis Singer Stropharia cubensis Earle. Stropharia Stroparia caerulescens (Pat.) Sing. Naematoloma caerulescens Pat. (Pat.) Sacc. &

Figure

Psilocybe cubensis fruiting on cased grain.

STRAINS: Strains of Psilocybe cubensis are available from private and commercial stocks. The American Type Collection, which sells cultures to educational organizations and research facilities, has stock of several wild strains. Note that the strains listed below are some of those that are presently circulating. There are many more. strains may originate from the same region but have features not in agreement with those described here. Amazonian: Medium to large mushrooms on rye grain; thick whitish stems; tenaciously tached to the casing.

Mushroom Fresh Air 0 per hour.

Type of Casing: After fully run, cover with the standard casing whose preparation is described in Chapter to a of 1-2 inches. The casing should be balanced to an initial of 6.8-7.2, Post Casing/Prepinning: Relative Humidify: 90 + Substrate Temperature: Duration of Case Run: 5-10 days. 5000-10,000 ppm. Fresh Air Exchanges: 0 per hour. Light: Incubation in total darkness. Primordia Formation: Humidity: Air Temperature: °F.

Figure

cubensis fruiting on cased straw.

Mushroom Cultivator

SPECIES: Psilocybe cyanescens Geophila cyanescens Singer

Kuhn. & Romagn,

Figure 165

fruiting indoors in a tray of alder chips.

STRAINS: St. Many wild strains can be adapted to cultivation. COMMON NAMES: Cyan; Grandote. GREEK AND LATIN ROOTS: species name is from ing. comes from the Creek or bald head. The or blue for the color reaction of the flesh upon bruis-

GENERAL DESCRIPTION: Cap 20-50 mm. broad, convex to broadly convex to plane in age with an elevated and undulating margin which is, in turn, The cap surface is smooth and viscid when moist from a separable pellicle ("skin"). The color is caramel

Mushroom Cultivator

Figure 166 inoculated with grain spawn.

mycelium growing on soaked corrugated cardboard

Cropping: Humidify: Air Temperature: 50-60 5000 or below. Fresh 2 per hour. Harvest Stage: When the caps become nearly plane. Light: Diffuse natural or Yield Potential: In natural outdoor culture on alder chips, 1 wet weight per square foot in one growing season is easily obtained. Moisture Content: water; 8% dry matter in fruitbodies. Comments: Psilocybe in a primary decomposer, readily digesting newly cut alder and other deciduous woods. Considered the grandote of the Pacific Northwest, this species is both

Mushroom Cultivator

SPECIES:

Heim

Figure six weeks

Sclerotia of Psilocybe mexicana harvested from one cup of rye grass seed inoculation.

STRAINS: Heim Strain Pollock Strain COMMON NAMES: Mushroom of the Cods; and Pajaritos (Spanish Name). or God's Flesh; Nize (Mazatec Name);

GREEK ROOT: Psilocybe comes from the Greek or bald head. The species name mexicana denotes the in which this mushroom grows. GENERAL DESCRIPTION: Convex To subumbonate, sometimes with a small expanding in age To plane or nearly so. The surface is smooth, Two Thirds To the disc. The cap color is brownish to orangish grey to straw brown, more yellowish to disc. The gills are adnately attached, grey to dark purplish brown. The stem is equal, smooth, pale straw to brown to reddish yellow, darkening when injured but typically not bruising bluish. Its spores are dark violet brown in mass. NATURAL HABITAT: Solitary to numerous in grassy areas, horse pastures and meadows

Growing Parameters for Various Mushroom Species/205

Figure Two quart jars at 10 days and 30 days after inoculation onto rye grass seed. though not occurring on dung. Distributed throughout subtropical regions in Mexico, common in the state of Oaxaca, and also known from Guatemala.

GROWTH PARAMETERS
Mycelial Types: Slightly rhizomorphic to finely linear; off-white to tan in color, sometimes with zones. Spawn Media: Annual rye grass seed or rye grain. Fruiting Substrates: Rye grass seed and to a lesser degree rye grain and pasteurized wheat straw. Few fruitbodies form on enriched malt agar media. Method of Preparation: Rye grass seed combined with water in a 2:1 proportion, preferably soaked overnight and then sterilized for 1 hour at psi. Wheat straw is pasteurized in a hot water bath at 1 60-1 °F. for 30 minutes. Spawn Run: Relative 90 + % Substrate Temperature: Duration: days. Relative Humidity: 90 10,000 ppm or higher. Fresh Air Exchanges: 0 hour. Type of Casing: Standard to a depth of inch. based casing whose preparation is described in Chapter Layer

Growing Parameters for Various Mushroom Species/207

SPECIES:

tampanensis Guzman and Pollock

Figure 169 Sclerotia of harvested from one cup of rye grass seed six months after inoculation.

Mushroom Cultivator

SPECIES: Stropharia apud Murrill Stropharia Bresadola Naematoloma fern (Bres.) Singer

Figure 170 Young fruitbodies of Stropharia straw cased with peat. STRAINS: Winnetou

fruiting on

The above listed are of European origin. Many strains of this species are available from culture banks, including those maintained by the American Type Culture Collection and Pennsylvania State Buckhout Strains are easy to from the spores and tissue of wild specimens. COMMON NAMES: The Wine Red Stropharia; The Giant Stropharia. LATIN ROOT: Stropharia means "sword belt", so named for the species epithet rugoso-annulata comes from the combination of two ing wrinkled and or ring. ring on the stem. The words: mean-

Growing Parameters for Various

Figure of fruiting outdoors in a bed of wood chips.

GENERAL DESCRIPTION: A large, thick fleshed mushroom with a cap measuring 50-400 mm. in diameter, darkly yellowish brown with distinct reddish tones. The is thick, membranous, leaving a persistent membranous ring on the stem on whose uppersides are tiers of gills. The stem is whitish and has rhizomorphs attached to its base. Its spores are dark purplish brown in mass. NATURAL HABITAT: Occurring in in wood chips, on decomposing straw, in sawdust enriched soils and commonly in grounds where potatoes have been planted.

GROWTH PARAMETERS
Mycelial Types: Rhizomorphic to closely linear; whitish in color. Standard Spawn Media: Rye grain or chopped wheat straw. Fruiting Substrates: Cased wheat straw, whole or chopped, and to a -74% moisture content. This species has been grown on a substrate of alder/maple chips mixed with mature horse manure using natural culture techniques.

Mushroom Cultivator Genetics, Nutrition and Cultivation" The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. S.T. Chang, 1 978. volvacea" in The rooms, pp. 573-603. Academic Press. New York. and Cultivation of Edible Mush-

Cultivation Problems and Their Solutions/217

CHAPTER XII CULTIVATION PROBLEMS AND THEIR SOLUTIONS: A TROUBLE-SHOOTING GUIDE

Figure

The

of bacterial contamination.

The Contaminants of Mushroom Culture/233

CHAPTER XIII THE CONTAMINANTS OF

MUSHROOM CULTURE

Figure 173 Sporulating structure of Aspergillus mold.

The Contaminants of Mushroom Culture/235

Figure mold near transferred wedge of mushroom myceliurn.

Figure Penicillium mold along outer periphery of petri dish.

an unfamiliar contaminant identifying the vector can be much more difficult. Only when The cultivator can pinpoint the variables leading to the introduction of contaminant can appropriate counter-measures be applied. Frequently what seems to be an inconsequential alteration in technique at one stage leads to a escalation of the contamination rate at stages. Since contamination at any phase of cultivation occurs for specific reasons, the contaminants can be the cultivator's most valuable guide for teaching one what NOT to do. If the problem causing organism is identified and if the recommended measures of control are carefully followed, a conscientious cultivator will avoid those conditions predisposing to that one competitor and, incidentally, many others. In effect, skill in mushroom culture is to in contamination control. Molds and bacteria do not grow well in a climate adjusted for mushrooms. Although both mushrooms and contaminants prefer humid conditions, the latter thrive in prolonged stagnant air environments whereas mushrooms do not. The differences are frequently to only a few percentage points in relative humidity and slight adjustments to the air dampers in the growing room. The contaminants can be divided into two well defined groups. Those attacking the mushrooms are called pathogens while Those competing for The substraTe are indicators or competitors. paThogens are either molds, bacferia, viruses or pests; indicators are fungi of some sort). In general, mushroom pathogens are not as numerous as the competitor molds, though they can be much more devastating. Not all and bacteria are damaging to the mushroom crop. To the contrary, several are beneficial. These can not be called true "contaminants" since cultivators try to promote, not hinder,

236/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure 176 High magnification scanning electron micrograph side germinating spore of

spore be-

their growth. To the beginner, however, they resemble real contaminants and therefore must be included in chapter. Examples of enhancing organisms are fungi and bacteria, including:

Streptomyces Select

and Bacillus species

These organisms are encouraged during the preparation of compost or during spawn run and are seen in agar or grain culture. Since they can not accurately be termed contaminants, the aforementioned groups are not in the following key though they are fully discussed in the ensuing descriptions. Fungi, bacteria and viruses can be roughly delimited according to their size. All but viruses can be detected by the home cultivator. Viruses can prevent fruiting, malform the mushroom fruitbody, and expose the crop to further infestations from other pathogens. Since detecting viruses is beyond the means of home cultivators, they have also been excluded from this key.

The Contaminants of Mushroom Culture/249

Figure Bacillus, the Wet Spot ium, as it appears on grain. Figure Scanning electron micrograph of rod shaped bacteria on a spore of Figure Scanning electron micrograph of rod shaped bacteria on mycelium of cubensis.

The Contaminants of Mushroom Culture/253

Figure a beneficial bacterium stimulatory to formation of fruitbodies in some mushroom species, growing on malt agar. Figure Bacterial pit on Psilocybe cubensis f r o m a Pseudomonas species.

Mushroom Cultivator Comments: A black mold, occasional to common on enriched agar, easily separated from similarly colored molds by its unique conidia (spores). It has been claimed that Alternaria more frequently contaminates sorghum than rye although the authors can not corroborate this statement from their experiences. See and

Figure 188

Scanning electron micrograph of

conidia.

260/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure 190 species as seen through a light microscope.

Figure Scanning electron micrograph of sporulating Aspergillus.

produced toxins, the aflatoxins are the most potent hepatacarcinogens yet found. The toxicity of this species was largely unknown until, in turkeys mysteriously died from an outbreak of this disease in Great Britain. Since A. grows on practically all types of grain, this species is of serious concern to mushroom spawn producers. Careful handling of any molds, those of the genus Aspergillus, should be a primary responsibility of all managers and workers in mushroom farms, are not, however, taken up in fruitbodies when contaminated spawn or cottonseed meal is used to a compost. Aspergillus and Aspergillus two thermotolerant mesophiles, are also pathogenic to humans in concentrated quantities. The affliction is called or "Mushroom Worker's Lung Disease". Spent compost is the most frequent source of Aspergillus fumigatus. Aspergillus niger, the common black mold, has been cultured commercially for its ability to

270/The Mushroom Cultivator

Class: Order: Agaricales Family: Common Name: Inky Cap. Habitat and Frequency of Occurrence: Frequent to common on compost and/or decomposing straw. Medium Through Which Contamination Is Spread: Primarily air; secondarily through materials used in compost preparation. Meaures of Control: Proper Phase I and Phase management, especially full term pasteurization; reduction of ammonia and water in finished and homogenous consistency of compost structure (avoidance of densely compacted zones).

Figure 196 Coprinus, the Inky Cap, on horse manure.

Macroscopic Appearance: Appearing as a fast growing whitish mycelium, typically fine and lacking soon knotting into small ovoid primordia that quickly enlarge into a mushroom with a long fragile stem and oblong cap. The cap soon disintegrates into a black inky liquid with spore maturity. Microscopic Characteristics: Smooth, elliptical spores produced on club-shaped cells called basidia. Hyphae often have clamp connections joining adjacent cells. History, Use and/or Medical species are noted for both their edibility and Coprinus the Shaggy Mane, is a popular edible and choice species that is cultivated. (See the growing parameter outline for that species). Coprinus has been reported by Atkins to be a competitor to the commercial cultivation of Agaricus, occurring in under-composted straw/manure. This species also causes severe nausea and other symptoms if alcohol is consumed within twenty fours of ingestion. Jonsson et reported marked reduction in sperm counts in treated with coprine, the same compound responsible for the above described symptoms. Comments: spores are noted for their heat resistance and often survive the composting

276/The Mushroom Cultivator

Figure 200 layer.

Photograph of Dactylium running through casing

clear or slightly yellowish in color and measure 20 x 5 microns. Use and/or Medical Implications: None noted. Comments: The Cobweb Mold is a fast growing, tenacious casing layer contaminant. Spores germinate upon contact with a mushroom, and soon envelope it with a soft mildewy mycelium. Spores of are killed when exposed to for only hour. (See Anderson, The genus is synonomous with Dactylium. Several species are known for their specialization in trapping by arranging their hyphae into loose coils. When one enters a loop, the hypha contract and traps the nematode. Dactylium is the conidial form of Hypomyces, some species of which attack wild mushrooms, particularly Agaricus, and others. dendroides is the asexual form of Hypomyces For more information consult: Lentz, 965-966. in Relation to the Conservation of Mycologia 58:

The Contaminants of Mushroom Culture/289 extremely simple and similar to mycelium or absent altogether. Its mycelium is hyaline, white or gray colored while the conidia are tan, gray or most commonly pink in Use and/or Medical Implications: Not known to be pathogenic. A disease known as moniiiasis in medicine is actually caused by a yeast-like fungus, and is more correctly termed candidiasis. Candida has been incorrectly called Monilia in medical mycology texts. genera share the same overall microscopic features and can be easily confused with Monilia. Monilia is a pivotal genus amongst a constellation of genera. For the purposes of the home cultivator, these forms might be more usefully called a "complex of genera". Comments: perfect form is represented by Neurospora (see that genus) and either phenotype is largely determined by factors, particularly pH. can vary in color on grain spawn: from a thick whitish mycelial mat to a powdery white, gray or pink colored mycelium. Perhaps the most devastating form is the one for its resemblence to mushroom mycelium. seen in agar culture, the pink form is noted for its high aerial mycelium. It climbs the sides of petri dishes. If not treated, this contaminant can be very to eradicate. Complete cleaning of the laboratory is the only recourse. After a Monilia outbreak careful attention must be directed at reestablishing spawn integrity. Monilia and Neurospora attack the mushroom beds and casing layers rapid growing grayish mycelia that soon develop pinkish tones with spore maturity. Contamination by this fungus is usually traced Jo unclean casing or infected spawn. Consult the genus Neurospora.

Figure 208 mycelium.

mold

on

agar

media

with

mushroom

The Contaminants of

Figure 210 more

Mucor, the Black Pin Mold, on malt agar. of fungi in This group refer to the reference below.

on the pathogenic

Comments: A vigorous contaminant and seen at various times in spawn production, inhibiting and overwhelming the mushroom mycelium. On malt agar media Mucor is a fast growing, non-sporulating, cottony and whitish mycelial network with or overwhelming mushroom mycelium. Mucor mycelium is non-rhizomorphic and the clamp connections that is characteristic of many mushroom mycelia. If in doubt whether a whitish mycelium or not, inoculate some bread with some lium covered kernels and incubate at a warm temperature. If the mold is Mucor, it will few days and be easy to identify. in a

The most frequently seen species of this genus are Mucor racemosus and Mucor Mucor a true thermophile, thrives in the 68-131 ° F. C.) range and is a major constituent in the microfiora of compost Mucor infected spawn, when inadvertently inoculated onto the mushroom compost, can result in the total contamination of the bed within a few days. Consult a contaminant whose vegetative mycelia resembles the mycelium of Mucor. See also a genus that differs from Mucor by its having a smaller sporangium receding from the "head" of the sporangiophore. For more information consult: Emmans, C.W., C.H. Binford, Philadelphia. Utz "Medical Lea and Febiger,

The Contaminants of Mushroom Culture/295

Figure

Wet Bubble, on cased rye grain spawn.

large and rough walled, often adorned with short spine-like projections, and which is attached to a smaller cup shaped smooth The second conidial type is smaller, ellipsoid, unicellular and develops apically from the ends of conidiophores. History, Use and/or Medical Implications: Not known to be pathogenic to man or animals. Comments: perniciosa Magnus is the species in the genus responsible for attacking the mushroom crop. Its mycelia intergrows with mushroom mycelia, according Kneebone (1 This is a vigorous and resilient contaminant. Its spores are killed at ° F. when exposed to moist heat (pasteurization) for 24 hours. Isolation of contaminated mushrooms, increasing lowering temperature and proper bed cleaning techniques all limit the spread of Mycogone. Kneebone recommends the use of chlorinated water during normal crop watering to impede the germination of its spores. Harvey et noted that if Mycogone appears during the flush, then its spores were probably introduced via the at the time of its application or during spawn run through it, a period of about two weeks. Later infestations are more probably spread by flies, workers, air currents or other means. Mycogone is believed by some mycologists to be an imperfect form of ascomycetous fungus that parasitizes wild mushrooms, especially and See also and an

The Contaminants of Mushroom Culture/297 Neurospora crassa has become a standard species for studying fungal genetics in culture. Comments: has an imperfect form represented by the genus which forms spores not in a envelope but in chains the end of hyphae. (See that genus). and/or are some of the fastest growing contaminants on grain and agar. The color of this contaminant, in either form, varies The of this organism to mutate into both an asexually reproducing fungus (Monilia) and a sexual one (Neurospora) is a factor largely determined by and pH levels encourage the expression of Monilia while higher pH media favor The characteristic pinkish tone and unique spore structure make Neurospora an easy nant to identify. Since this fungus grows through cotton stoppers or filter discs, a single contaminated jar, though can spread spores to adjacent spawn jars within the laboratory. This condition is more likely if the filter discs or cotton plugs are the least bit damp; or if The external humidity is high. Furthermore, Neurospora spores germinate more readily at temperatures. The red bread mold belongs to the Neurospora crassa complex. The pink mold seen in mushroom culture is most frequently Neurospora a pernicious contaminant that is difficult to eliminate. All infected cultures should be removed as soon as from the laboratory and destroyed. A thorough cleaning of the laboratory is absolutely necessary. If contamination persists, remove ail spawn and start anew. Since Neurospora spores are spread via the air, high efficiency Particulate air (HEPA) filters readily eliminate this contaminant. Refer to the genus Monilia, an imperfect form of Neurospora.

Figure

Neurospora contaminating PDA media. Note creeping aerial mycelium.

The

of

Figure 218 Scanning micrograph of

electron

bacteria when the two grew in close A fluid that was being exuded from the fungus caught his curiosity. Upon reporting his finding, collegues later found the fluid contained a powerful new antibiotic which was named penicillin. He had, in fact, cultured Currently penicillin is commercially produced by high yielding strains of Through its use, millions of people been cured of illnesses were previously untreatFrom the widespread use and abuse of this drug, however, new, more virulent resistant strains of bacteria have evolved. From the production of steroids to the making of roquefort cheese (by Penicillium roquefortii), this genus is resplendent with species of proven value to man. if any, are pathogenic. Comments: Since the high of Penicillium spores indoors is traceable to decomposing foodstuffs, one can reduce the of this contaminant by simply following good hygienic practices. Penicillium, a prolific spore producer, is an ubiquitous fungus. It is probably the most common contaminant seen in the laboratory. Although Penicillium can attack casing soil and mushroom debris, it is not as prevalent as in these habitats. Other green molds, similar in appearance, are and Penicillium sometimes contaminates poorly prepared or spawned compost that has undergone secondary heating. Here, grain kernels formerly colonized by mushroom mycelium become susceptible to weed molds such as Penicillium and and then spread the compost and/or casing soil. Differing from Aspergillus and Trichoderma in the shape of the conidiophore. For further information: "The by Raper and lication. See Color Photograph 20. who species at the time of pub-

The Contaminants of Mushroom Culture/303 History, Use and/or Medical Implications: In itself, not a pathogen to man. Reports in The medical literature in the past blamed for when in fact other related and responsible. Rhizopus the black bread moid, is utilized in the commerical production of fuacid and cortisone. Other species in the genus secrete assorted alcohols and acids as metabolic waste products. Comments: Along with and species of this genus are the primary contaminants of grain spawn. Rhizopus is rapid growing, and is called the Pin Mold for the shape of the spore producing body. Rhizopus stolonifer Rhizopus nigracans) is the Black Pin Mold and can elevate the substrate temperature from room temperature to the F. range. At this level, the populations of the true thermophiles increase dramatically, further heating up the host to temperatures lethal to the mushroom mycelium. See also a mold that is cioseiy related the apex of the sporagiophore. but whose sporangium completely

Figure 220

the Black Pin Mold, on malt agar.

The Contaminants of Mushroom Culture/307 Use and/or Medical Implications: species possibly toxic. It has been suggested That this mold a sweet odor nauseous to some mushroom and possibly the cause of a understood respiratory illness. Not much is known. Comments: spores are for their heat resistance. It is a mold until the yellow conidia are produced. On malt agar media, Sepedonium is fast running, and out-grows most mushroom mycelia. When the two fungi grow within close proximity to one another, a line of inhibition usually develops between the two. If conidiospores or chiamydospores are not produced, this mold is difficult to identify. The conidiophores are indistinct, very much resembling its own mycelium. From the authors' experience this contaminant is a vigorous on agar media. appearance necessitates a thorough cleaning of the laboratory and spawn incubation environment. If this mold contaminates grain spawn and goes undetected, use of this spawn in tions would be The second of contamination is horse manure/straw compost where it most frequently appears during spawn run. Only detrimental when large outbreaks occur, presence on compost can be traced to insufficient or spent compost residues in the trays or shelves. Although not regarded as a serious competitor on mushroom compost, is another fungus believed to be a food source for mites (Kneebone, 1961). Sepedonium, like is an imperfect state of a common parasite on mushrooms. In the wild, Sepedonium parasitizes Boletus species (particularly and causes them To abort. The chiamydospores of Sepedonium are generally similar to See and Mycelia Sterilia, two fast running molds on agar media.

Figure 223 Sepedonium mold competing with cubensis mycelia on malt malt agar media

The Contaminants of Mushroom Macroscopic Appearance: A cottony mold, growing in circular colonies on the casing soil or on compost; grayish and diffuse at first; rapidly growing; and soon forest green from spore production. On malt agar colonies of have an aerial, cottony and brilliant forest green mycelium has an appressed, granular and blue green mycelium. Some infrequently encountered species are whitish or yellowish, but majority of those seen in mushroom culture are greenish shaded. Parasitized mushrooms have dry brownish blotches or sunken lesions on the cap or stern. They are often by a fine downy mildew that may eventually become greenish from spore production, and are Microscopic Characteristics: Conidiophores clear, profusely branched upon whose ends small bunches of ovoid greenish pigrnented, smooth spores are borne. many species uniquely shaped sporogenous cells are roughly resembling bowling pins and arranged as triads. After squashing a sample for viewing under the microscope, the conidiophores readily disassemble and are difficult to recognize. The freed conidia, however, are not arranged in linear chains as commonly seen in and Penicillium, but are in loose clusters or are as individuals. A

Figure 226 cubensis.

mold

parasitizing

Psilocybe

Mushroom Cultivator streaks on the or upper regions of the stem and on the caps of developing primordia. These spots become grayish colored from spore production. mushrooms often bend towards the side that is infected. If the mushrooms do develop at all, they are typically tilted to one side or the other. attacks developing more severely infected are grossly malformed, especially young primordia which are turned into balls of amorphous whitish mycelia. More mature but diseased mushrooms have a deformed sometimes with a "hair lip", and frequently with a downy grayish mycelium over the cap. The stem can be covered with a downy mycelium and often vertically splits, roughly resembling a peeled banana. The cap becomes disproportionately small relative to the Than normal stem. The overall texture of the mushroom is dry and When this mold attacks cubensis, there are several additional characters worthy of note. Parasitized P. cubensis caps frequently become plane at an early stage. The stem becomes swollen and narrowing radically towards the apex. Only in an extremely humid environment does a downy mildew develop over the cap and stem surface. The "Verticillium spots" so commonly reported by growers a white mushroom, are more accurately called "Verticillium streaks" on P. cubensis, a mushroom with a brownish cap and a whitish stem.

Figure 229

Verticillium attacking Psilocybe cubensis.

Pests of Mushroom Culture/319

CHAPTER XIV THE PESTS OF MUSHROOM CULTURE

Figure 230 Red Pepper Mites swarming on Agaricus brunnescens.

330/Pests of Mushroom Culture

Figure 236 Light micrograph of Red Pepper Mite. Note that darkened shapes front leg are Panaeolus spores. See also Figure 230. Figure 237 testing apparatus. Sample is wrapped in gauze and submerged in a water filled funnel. After twenty-four hours, a small amount of water is drawn off and examined with a lens or dissecting scope.

Mushroom Genetics/333

CHAPTER XV MUSHROOM GENETICS

Figure 239 Gill face of basidia and sterile cells called

cyanescens populated with fertile spore-bearing

Mushroom

Culture Trials
When a number of strains have been generated from a sporeprint, they are different because of recombination in the basidium. Some of the strains MAY be identical to the parent strain, but that demonstrated by some testing procedure. As in any screening the more strains used, the better the chance of a good result. fact, professional mushroom breeders often do trials with thousands of strains at a time. This kind of work, however, takes large and expensive and is unnecessary if the purpose is simply to find a strain which well under a certain set of conditions. A strain which fruits well in test batches under uniform conditions has a high likelihood of doing well in larges batches when The same conditions of temperature, humidity and aeration are maintained. How many strains need to be tested? If the mushroom being worked with is tetrapolar, only one third of the dikaryotic colonies picked out will be capable of at all. In order to make trials of ten fruiting strains, begin with at least thirty dikaryotic strains. Many mushrooms, especially the fruit on enriched agar media in a petri plate if given proper temperatures and some light. If the mushroom being tested is one of These, the selection of fruiting strains is simple. A mushroom requiring a special substrate or additive to fruit should be provided with the smallest amount allowable. For example, can be fruited on 50 grams of sterilized grain in a pint if is cased with soil containing certain bacteria. The

Figure 240

Two

basidium of a Copelandian

Appendix II: Laminar Flow Systems/349

Figure 240 hood.

A commercially available laminar flow

rated to .3 or .1 microns. Extended surface filters are commonly known as HEPA (High Efficiency Particulate Air) filters. First used commercially in these filters are honeycombed with fine sheets of microporous material that can screen out particulates down to less than one third of a micron size with a rated 99.99% efficiency. All spores of fungi and most bacteria are thereby trapped within the folds of the filter. The collection media in this type of filter can be composed of various materials including hair, spun glass, wool, paper and asbestos. the past, asbestos has been used in the manufacturing of all types of filters. Since asbestos is cancer causing, be sure to specify a non-asbestos fiber). The exTended surface media filter consists of folds of material woven back and forth. aluminum or paper separators are inserted perpendicularly to the filter face and separate the folds to help direct in an even, fashion. The hits the filter material at a perpendicular angle and is forced to pass through the many weaves of the filter before exiting. From the force of impact, inertia and the size of the media web, particles are trapped within the filter. The result is that a very high efficiency is achieved, particularly with diameter particles. Extended surface filters much higher resistance than electrostatic filters but they have a far

Appendix

Effects of Bacteria on

APPENDIX III THE EFFECT OF BACTERIA AND OTHER MICROORGANISMS ON FRUITING
lthough mushrooms been cultivated for more than two hundred years, little is known about the biological processes of fruiting. For mushroom pinheads to form suddenly and then to enlarge into towering mushrooms within a few days represents a many hundred-fold plication in biomass. This ability to generate tissue so rapidly has few in nature and has been the subject of numerous scientific papers. Mushrooms are in constant competition with organisms sharing the same habitat. Dung inhabiting mushrooms in particular (like cubensis and live in an environment that teems with other microorganisms feeding on organic wastes and dead cell matter. Dung is by a temporary substrate, decomposing completely in only a few weeks. Within this short period of time there is a succession of dominant microorganisms, most notably fungi and bacteria. For a new mushroom colony to grow, its spores must fall, germinate, mate, form a substantial

Figure 242 bacteria.

mycelium

contaminated

with

